
Emily Sanford - Looking at Features in Images (Part 1)
------
How many apples are on that tree? Even without counting, 
you can “guesstimate” approximately how many there are, 
and if you are looking at two different trees, you can 
get a strong sense for which one has more apples. The 
mechanism by which you make these estimates is known as 
the Approximate Number System (ANS). Although many 
species seem to have an ANS, and in humans this ability 
seems related to other math skills, it remains unclear 
how the ANS figures out how many items you are looking 
at. Despite the evidence for an evolutionarily-ancient 
number sense, many researchers think that people make 
decisions about number based on other features (such as 
the density of items in a scene), and therefore, this 
ability is not related to number at all.  The purpose of 
this experiment is to investigate how people gather 
numerical information from visual scenes, and to see 
whether people behave similarly when gathering other 
(non-numerical) information.

In this experiment, you viewed the same images three 
times, and each time you made a different decision about 
them. If your number judgments are made on the basis of 
“area thoughts” instead of “number thoughts,” then there 
should be a relationship between how you responded to the 
same image regardless of what task you were performing. 
Also, it is likely that some features of the images are 
easier to perceive than others, and we are investigating 
to what extent features interfere with each other’s 
judgment (e.g., how much do you get distracted by number 
when making an area judgment?). This knowledge will help 
us better understand the perceptual basis of number, 
which has important implications for math education.

We are now interested in how stable performance is on 
these different tasks (i.e., does one’s number 
performance early on predict their later number 
performance?) and whether performance on one task is 
related to performance on another task. For this reason, 
we will be asking you to come back and complete the 
second part of this study at the end of the semester, for 
additional course credit. Look out for an email from us, 
and we hope to see you again at the end of the semester!

******